docs/index.md, before:

---
title: Darwin Day Tennessee
subtitle: Educating our community about evolution
toc: true
---

Darwin Day in Knoxville, Tennessee is a volunteer-run event dedicated to informing the public about evolution and its importance as a unifying concept in all of biology. Our goal is to disseminate factual information in the context of a non-confrontational and rational discussion based on empirical evidence.

We sponsored our first Darwin Day event on February 12th of 1997, the 188th birthday of Charles Robert Darwin. Since this first Darwin Day, the annual celebration has grown to include an annual keynote speaker, a teacher's workshop, and other events. See [Sheffield & Bauer (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12052-017-0073-3) and [Goodman (2008)](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12052-008-0060-9) for publications describing its evolution and impact.

# 2021: Darwin Cake Day!

**Biodiversity Viewing Party**: Friday, Feb. 12, 6:30 - 8 pm US Eastern Time: We will all watch together the first episode of the nature documentary Our Planet, after an introduction by Dr. Laura Russo about biodiversity. Dr. Russo's talk is streamed [here](https://tennessee.zoom.us/j/93031218664) followed by a discussion. The documentary can be seen on [Netflix](https://www.netflix.com/title/80049832) and on [YouTube](https://youtu.be/GfO-3Oir-qM). We also embed it below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GfO-3Oir-qM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

**Reddit AMA on Evolution**: We will host an ask me anything about evolution on the [Ask Science subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/) on Monday, Feb. 15, 2021. People can start adding questions in the morning (US Eastern time) and we'll jump on throughout the afternoon to answer them. Our panelists will be:

* [Dr. Stephanie Drumheller-Horton](https://eps.utk.edu/faculty/drumheller.php), paleontology, especially taphonomy
* [Amy Luo](https://eeb.utk.edu/people/amy-luo/), PhD student, bird song dialect evolution
* [Krista De Cooke](https://www.linkedin.com/in/krista-de-cooke-163a87116/), PhD student, invasive plant spread and native plant alternatives
* [Dr. Dan Simberloff](https://eeb.utk.edu/people/daniel-simberloff/), invasive species and biogeography
* [Dr. Brian O'Meara](http://brianomeara.info/), macroevolution, especially speciation, extinction, and trait evolution

If you want an example of the sort of discussion that takes place, here's a [past one on vertebrate paleontology](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/comments/jayj2c/we_are_scientists_from_the_society_of_vertebrate/) that might be of interest.


**Evolution Bake Off**: Use the hashtag `#evolutionbakeoff` to tag a biodiversity or evolution inspired baked creation on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, Flickr, Instagram, or wherever you use social media: Dodo Donuts, Trilo-Bites, Kludgie the Legged Whale ice cream cake. Use your imagination! To make sure we don't miss it (though we'll be checking the tag on various platforms), please fill in [this form](https://forms.gle/6TBtYzNGRdM8934A7). We'd love all submissions in by 11:59 pm US Eastern on Feb. 19. Here's an inspiration from [Leila Battison](https://leilabattison.wordpress.com/2012/01/01/the-pinnacle-of-cake-evolution/):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_3vn_5FLees" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Note this has no affiliation with any television shows or other baking competitions. And, sadly, taste will not be assessed by us, but we hope you and those in your bubble enjoy the taste of your creations.

Due to covid, we will not be co-hosting the annual Darwin's birthday party with the McClung museum, and our fantastic Darwin and Wallace puppets will remain safely at home. But they will return in 2022!

# 2020: Keynote [Dr. Jessica Ware](https://www.newark.rutgers.edu/about-us/have-you-met-rutgers-newark/jessica-ware)

Here is a talk by Dr. Ware at the March for Science:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MzwYsuzfDPU" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

**Phylum Feast**: Wednesday, February 12th, 11:30 am. Ayres 308h

**Keynote** Dr. Jessica Ware. Wed. Feb 12, 6 pm, Strong Hall 101

**Evolution Board Game Tournament** Saturday, February 15th, 11:30 am, McClung Museum

**Darwin's Birthday Party** Saturday, February 15th, 12:30 pm, McClung Museum

This year's organizer is Krista De Cooke (kdecooke@vols.utk.edu).

Sponsors for Darwin Day this year include the University of Tennessee, Knoxville's departments of Theater; Religious Studies; Classics; Math; History; Sociology; Plant Sciences; Art; and Ecology & Evolutionary Biology; as well as the National Institute for Biological and Mathematical Synthesis (NIMBioS).

# 2019: Keynote [Dr. Alan Templeton](https://pages.wustl.edu/templeton)

**Birthday party**: [Darwin's birthday party](https://news.utk.edu/2019/02/12/mcclung-museum-plans-family-activities-for-darwin-day/) was hosted at the McClung museum.

**Organizers**: Mali Hubert, Claire Winfrey, Clara Howell

# 2018: Keynote [Dr. Nizar Ibrahim](https://www.nizaribrahim.net/)

German/Moroccan paleontologist Nizar Ibrahim, a postdoctoral scholar in vertebrate anatomy and paleontology at the University of Chicago, scours the deserts of North Africa for clues to life in the Cretaceous period, when the area was a large river system teeming with a profusion of diverse life. In addition to unearthing many huge dinosaur bones, he has discovered fossil footprints and a new species of flying reptile with an 18-foot wingspan that lived 95 million years ago. His upcoming paper describing the ecosystem of what is now Morocco's Sahara Desert in the mid-Cretaceous period will be a milestone, providing the most detailed account of the diversity, paleoecology, and geologic context of fossil vertebrates from North Africa. His description is especially important, since northern Africa and the mid-Cretaceous period are underexplored and underrepresented in paleontology. "We found an entire lost world; a window on a moment of major evolutionary change," he says. Nizar Ibrahim was named a National Geographic Emerging Explorer in 2014.

**Birthday party**: Darwin's birthday party was hosted at the McClung museum.

* [Knox News Sentinel articles](https://www.knoxnews.com/story/news/education/2018/02/10/university-tennessee-mcclung-museum-hosts-family-fun-day-celebrate-charles-darwin-birthday-knoxville/326585002/)

**Organizers**: Maggie Limbeck and Jessica Beck



# Informational Handouts

## History

*   [A Brief History of Charles Darwin](handouts/A%20Brief%20History%20of%20Charles%20Darwin.pdf "A Brief History of Charles Darwin")

*   [A Brief History of Alfred R. Wallace](handouts/A%20Brief%20History%20of%20Alfred%20R.%20Wallace.pdf "A Brief History of Alfred R. Wallace")

## On Understanding Evolution

*   [Defining Evolution](handouts/Defining%20Evolution.pdf "Defining Evolution")

*   [Common Misconceptions about Evolution](handouts/Common%20Misconceptions%20about%20Evolution.pdf "Common Misconceptions about Evolution")

*   [Is Evolution FACT or THEORY](handouts/Is%20Evolution%20FACT%20or%20THEORY.pdf "Is Evolution FACT or THEORY")

*   [Natural Selection is not an Invisible Hand](handouts/Natural%20Selection%20is%20not%20an%20Invisible%20Hand.pdf "Natural Selection is not an Invisible Hand")

*   [Question and Answer on Evolution with AAAS](handouts/QA%20Evolution%20AAAS.pdf "Question and Answer on Evolution with AAAS")

*   [Answers to Jonathan Wells's "10 Questions to ask your biology teacher about evolution"](handouts/Answers%20to%20Jonathan%20Wells_revised.pdf "Answers to Jonathan Wells's ")

## In the Classroom

*   [Why Teach Evolution?](handouts/Why%20Teach%20Evolution.pdf "Why Teach Evolution?")

*   [Cans and Can'ts of Teaching Evolution](handouts/Cans%20and%20Can'ts%20of%20teaching%20evolution.pdf "Cans and Can'ts of Teaching Evolution")

*   [Opting out - Not!](handouts/Opting%20out%20-%20Not.pdf "Opting out - Not!")

*   [Should Intelligent Design be Taught in Schools?](handouts/Should%20ID%20be%20taught%20in%20schools.pdf "Should Intelligent Design be Taught in Schools?")

Commit message:

header on number of events

docs/index.md, after:

---
title: Darwin Day Tennessee
subtitle: Educating our community about evolution
toc: true
---

Darwin Day in Knoxville, Tennessee is a volunteer-run event dedicated to informing the public about evolution and its importance as a unifying concept in all of biology. Our goal is to disseminate factual information in the context of a non-confrontational and rational discussion based on empirical evidence.

We sponsored our first Darwin Day event on February 12th of 1997, the 188th birthday of Charles Robert Darwin. Since this first Darwin Day, the annual celebration has grown to include an annual keynote speaker, a teacher's workshop, and other events. See [Sheffield & Bauer (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12052-017-0073-3) and [Goodman (2008)](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12052-008-0060-9) for publications describing its evolution and impact.

# 2021: Darwin Cake Day!

We have **three** events this year: a Biodiversity Viewing Party, a Reddit AMA, and an Evolution Bake Off. See below.

**Biodiversity Viewing Party**: Friday, Feb. 12, 6:30 - 8 pm US Eastern Time: We will all watch together the first episode of the nature documentary Our Planet, after an introduction by Dr. Laura Russo about biodiversity. Dr. Russo's talk is streamed [here](https://tennessee.zoom.us/j/93031218664) followed by a discussion. The documentary can be seen on [Netflix](https://www.netflix.com/title/80049832) and on [YouTube](https://youtu.be/GfO-3Oir-qM). We also embed it below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GfO-3Oir-qM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

**Reddit AMA on Evolution**: We will host an ask me anything about evolution on the [Ask Science subreddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/) on Monday, Feb. 15, 2021. People can start adding questions in the morning (US Eastern time) and we'll jump on throughout the afternoon to answer them. Our panelists will be:

* [Dr. Stephanie Drumheller-Horton](https://eps.utk.edu/faculty/drumheller.php), paleontology, especially taphonomy
* [Amy Luo](https://eeb.utk.edu/people/amy-luo/), PhD student, bird song dialect evolution
* [Krista De Cooke](https://www.linkedin.com/in/krista-de-cooke-163a87116/), PhD student, invasive plant spread and native plant alternatives
* [Dr. Dan Simberloff](https://eeb.utk.edu/people/daniel-simberloff/), invasive species and biogeography
* [Dr. Brian O'Meara](http://brianomeara.info/), macroevolution, especially speciation, extinction, and trait evolution

If you want an example of the sort of discussion that takes place, here's a [past one on vertebrate paleontology](https://www.reddit.com/r/askscience/comments/jayj2c/we_are_scientists_from_the_society_of_vertebrate/) that might be of interest.


**Evolution Bake Off**: Use the hashtag `#evolutionbakeoff` to tag a biodiversity or evolution inspired baked creation on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, Flickr, Instagram, or wherever you use social media: Dodo Donuts, Trilo-Bites, Kludgie the Legged Whale ice cream cake. Use your imagination! To make sure we don't miss it (though we'll be checking the tag on various platforms), please fill in [this form](https://forms.gle/6TBtYzNGRdM8934A7). We'd love all submissions in by 11:59 pm US Eastern on Feb. 19. Here's an inspiration from [Leila Battison](https://leilabattison.wordpress.com/2012/01/01/the-pinnacle-of-cake-evolution/):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_3vn_5FLees" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Note this has no affiliation with any television shows or other baking competitions. And, sadly, taste will not be assessed by us, but we hope you and those in your bubble enjoy the taste of your creations.

Due to covid, we will not be co-hosting the annual Darwin's birthday party with the McClung museum, and our fantastic Darwin and Wallace puppets will remain safely at home. But they will return in 2022!

# 2020: Keynote [Dr. Jessica Ware](https://www.newark.rutgers.edu/about-us/have-you-met-rutgers-newark/jessica-ware)

Here is a talk by Dr. Ware at the March for Science:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MzwYsuzfDPU" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

**Phylum Feast**: Wednesday, February 12th, 11:30 am. Ayres 308h

**Keynote** Dr. Jessica Ware. Wed. Feb 12, 6 pm, Strong Hall 101

**Evolution Board Game Tournament** Saturday, February 15th, 11:30 am, McClung Museum

**Darwin's Birthday Party** Saturday, February 15th, 12:30 pm, McClung Museum

This year's organizer is Krista De Cooke (kdecooke@vols.utk.edu).

Sponsors for Darwin Day this year include the University of Tennessee, Knoxville's departments of Theater; Religious Studies; Classics; Math; History; Sociology; Plant Sciences; Art; and Ecology & Evolutionary Biology; as well as the National Institute for Biological and Mathematical Synthesis (NIMBioS).

# 2019: Keynote [Dr. Alan Templeton](https://pages.wustl.edu/templeton)

**Birthday party**: [Darwin's birthday party](https://news.utk.edu/2019/02/12/mcclung-museum-plans-family-activities-for-darwin-day/) was hosted at the McClung museum.

**Organizers**: Mali Hubert, Claire Winfrey, Clara Howell

# 2018: Keynote [Dr. Nizar Ibrahim](https://www.nizaribrahim.net/)

German/Moroccan paleontologist Nizar Ibrahim, a postdoctoral scholar in vertebrate anatomy and paleontology at the University of Chicago, scours the deserts of North Africa for clues to life in the Cretaceous period, when the area was a large river system teeming with a profusion of diverse life. In addition to unearthing many huge dinosaur bones, he has discovered fossil footprints and a new species of flying reptile with an 18-foot wingspan that lived 95 million years ago. His upcoming paper describing the ecosystem of what is now Morocco's Sahara Desert in the mid-Cretaceous period will be a milestone, providing the most detailed account of the diversity, paleoecology, and geologic context of fossil vertebrates from North Africa. His description is especially important, since northern Africa and the mid-Cretaceous period are underexplored and underrepresented in paleontology. "We found an entire lost world; a window on a moment of major evolutionary change," he says. Nizar Ibrahim was named a National Geographic Emerging Explorer in 2014.

**Birthday party**: Darwin's birthday party was hosted at the McClung museum.

* [Knox News Sentinel articles](https://www.knoxnews.com/story/news/education/2018/02/10/university-tennessee-mcclung-museum-hosts-family-fun-day-celebrate-charles-darwin-birthday-knoxville/326585002/)

**Organizers**: Maggie Limbeck and Jessica Beck



# Informational Handouts

## History

*   [A Brief History of Charles Darwin](handouts/A%20Brief%20History%20of%20Charles%20Darwin.pdf "A Brief History of Charles Darwin")

*   [A Brief History of Alfred R. Wallace](handouts/A%20Brief%20History%20of%20Alfred%20R.%20Wallace.pdf "A Brief History of Alfred R. Wallace")

## On Understanding Evolution

*   [Defining Evolution](handouts/Defining%20Evolution.pdf "Defining Evolution")

*   [Common Misconceptions about Evolution](handouts/Common%20Misconceptions%20about%20Evolution.pdf "Common Misconceptions about Evolution")

*   [Is Evolution FACT or THEORY](handouts/Is%20Evolution%20FACT%20or%20THEORY.pdf "Is Evolution FACT or THEORY")

*   [Natural Selection is not an Invisible Hand](handouts/Natural%20Selection%20is%20not%20an%20Invisible%20Hand.pdf "Natural Selection is not an Invisible Hand")

*   [Question and Answer on Evolution with AAAS](handouts/QA%20Evolution%20AAAS.pdf "Question and Answer on Evolution with AAAS")

*   [Answers to Jonathan Wells's "10 Questions to ask your biology teacher about evolution"](handouts/Answers%20to%20Jonathan%20Wells_revised.pdf "Answers to Jonathan Wells's ")

## In the Classroom

*   [Why Teach Evolution?](handouts/Why%20Teach%20Evolution.pdf "Why Teach Evolution?")

*   [Cans and Can'ts of Teaching Evolution](handouts/Cans%20and%20Can'ts%20of%20teaching%20evolution.pdf "Cans and Can'ts of Teaching Evolution")

*   [Opting out - Not!](handouts/Opting%20out%20-%20Not.pdf "Opting out - Not!")

*   [Should Intelligent Design be Taught in Schools?](handouts/Should%20ID%20be%20taught%20in%20schools.pdf "Should Intelligent Design be Taught in Schools?")
